---
title: "Practice Test 3"
layout: page
---


# 8.1: Confidence Interval, Single Population Mean, Population Standard Deviation Known, Normal

*Use the following information to answer the next seven exercises.* You draw a sample of size 30 from a normally distributed population with a standard deviation of four.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the standard error of the sample mean in this scenario, rounded to two decimal places?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the distribution of the sample mean?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you want to construct a two-sided 95% confidence interval, how much probability will be in each tail of the distribution?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the appropriate *z*-score and error bound or margin of error (*EBM*) for a 95% confidence interval for this data?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Rounding to two decimal places, what is the 95% confidence interval if the sample mean is 41?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the 90% confidence interval if the sample mean is 41? Round to two decimal places

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose the sample size in this study had been 50, rather than 30. What would the 95% confidence interval be if the sample mean is 41? Round your answer to two decimal places.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For any given data set and sampling situation, which would you expect to be wider: a 95% confidence interval or a 99% confidence interval?

</div>
</div>

# 8.2: Confidence Interval, Single Population Mean, Standard Deviation Unknown, Student’s *t*

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Comparing graphs of the standard normal distribution (*z*-distribution) and a *t*-distribution with 15 degrees of freedom (*df*), how do they differ?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Comparing graphs of the standard normal distribution (*z*-distribution) and a *t*-distribution with 15 degrees of freedom (*df*), how are they similar?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next five exercises.* Body temperature is known to be distributed normally among healthy adults. Because you do not know the population standard deviation, you use the t-distribution to study body temperature. You collect data from a random sample of 20 healthy adults and find that your sample temperatures have a mean of 98.4 and a sample standard deviation of 0.3 (both in degrees Fahrenheit).

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the degrees of freedom (*df*) for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For a two-tailed 95% confidence interval, what is the appropriate *t*-value to use in the formula?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the 95% confidence interval?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" id="eip-107">
<div data-type="problem" id="eip-650" markdown="1">
What is the 99% confidence interval? Round to two decimal places.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose your sample size had been 30 rather than 20. What would the 95% confidence interval be then? Round to two decimal places

</div>
</div>

# 8.3: Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion

*Use this information to answer the next four exercises.* You conduct a poll of 500 randomly selected city residents, asking them if they own an automobile. 280 say they do own an automobile, and 220 say they do not.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Find the sample proportion and sample standard deviation for this data.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the 95% two-sided confidence interval? Round to four decimal places.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Calculate the 90% confidence interval. Round to four decimal places.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Calculate the 99% confidence interval. Round to four decimal places.

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next three exercises.* You are planning to conduct a poll of community members age 65 and older, to determine how many own mobile phones. You want to produce an estimate whose 95% confidence interval will be within four percentage points (plus or minus) the true population proportion. Use an estimated population proportion of 0.5.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What sample size do you need?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose you knew from prior research that the population proportion was 0.6. What sample size would you need?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose you wanted a 95% confidence interval within three percentage points of the population. Assume the population proportion is 0.5. What sample size do you need?

</div>
</div>

# 9.1: Null and Alternate Hypotheses

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
In your state, 58 percent of registered voters in a community are registered as Republicans. You want to conduct a study to see if this also holds up in your community. State the null and alternative hypotheses to test this.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You believe that at least 58 percent of registered voters in a community are registered as Republicans. State the null and alternative hypotheses to test this.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The mean household value in a city is $268,000. You believe that the mean household value in a particular neighborhood is lower than the city average. Write the null and alternative hypotheses to test this.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
State the appropriate alternative hypothesis to this null hypothesis: *H<sub>0</sub>*: *μ* = 107

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
State the appropriate alternative hypothesis to this null hypothesis: *H<sub>0</sub>*: *p* &lt; 0.25

</div>
</div>

# 9.2: Outcomes and the Type I and Type II Errors

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you reject *H<sub>0</sub>* when *H<sub>0</sub>* is correct, what type of error is this?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you fail to reject *H<sub>0</sub>* when *H<sub>0</sub>* is false, what type of error is this?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the relationship between the Type II error and the power of a test?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
A new blood test is being developed to screen patients for cancer. Positive results are followed up by a more accurate (and expensive) test. It is assumed that the patient does not have cancer. Describe the null hypothesis, the Type I and Type II errors for this situation, and explain which type of error is more serious.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Explain in words what it means that a screening test for TB has an *α* level of 0.10. The null hypothesis is that the patient does not have TB.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Explain in words what it means that a screening test for TB has a *β* level of 0.20. The null hypothesis is that the patient does not have TB.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Explain in words what it means that a screening test for TB has a power of 0.80.

</div>
</div>

# 9.3: Distribution Needed for Hypothesis Testing

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you are conducting a hypothesis test of a single population mean, and you do not know the population variance, what test will you use if the sample size is 10 and the population is normal?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you are conducting a hypothesis test of a single population mean, and you know the population variance, what test will you use?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you are conducting a hypothesis test of a single population proportion, with *np* and *nq* greater than or equal to five, what test will you use, and with what parameters?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Published information indicates that, on average, college students spend less than 20 hours studying per week. You draw a sample of 25 students from your college, and find the sample mean to be 18.5 hours, with a standard deviation of 1.5 hours. What distribution will you use to test whether study habits at your college are the same as the national average, and why?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
A published study says that 95 percent of American children are vaccinated against measles, with a standard deviation of 1.5 percent. You draw a sample of 100 children from your community and check their vaccination records, to see if the vaccination rate in your community is the same as the national average. What distribution will you use for this test, and why?

</div>
</div>

# 9.4: Rare Events, the Sample, Decision, and Conclusion

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You are conducting a study with an α level of 0.05. If you get a result with a p-value of 0.07, what will be your decision?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You are conducting a study with *α* = 0.01. If you get a result with a *p*-value of 0.006, what will be your decision?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next five exercises.* According to the World Health Organization, the average height of a one-year-old child is 29”. You believe children with a particular disease are smaller than average, so you draw a sample of 20 children with this disease and find a mean height of 27.5” and a sample standard deviation of 1.5”.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the null and alternative hypotheses for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What distribution will you use to test your hypothesis, and why?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the test statistic and the *p*-value?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Based on your sample results, what is your decision?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose the mean for your sample was 25.0. Redo the calculations and describe what your decision would be.

</div>
</div>

# 9.5: Additional Information and Full Hypothesis Test Examples

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct a study using α = 0.05. What is the level of significance for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct a study, based on a sample drawn from a normally distributed population with a known variance, with the following hypotheses: * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

*H<sub>0</sub>*: *μ* = 35.5 * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

*H<sub>a</sub>*: *μ* ≠ 35.5 * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

Will you conduct a one-tailed or two-tailed test?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct a study, based on a sample drawn from a normally distributed population with a known variance, with the following hypotheses: * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

*H<sub>0</sub>*: *μ* ≥ 35.5 * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

*H<sub>a</sub>*: *μ* &lt; 35.5 * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

Will you conduct a one-tailed or two-tailed test?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next three exercises.* Nationally, 80 percent of adults own an automobile. You are interested in whether the same proportion in your community own cars. You draw a sample of 100 and find that 75 percent own cars.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the null and alternative hypotheses for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What test will you use, and why?

</div>
</div>

# 10.1: Comparing Two Independent Population Means with Unknown Population Standard Deviations

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct a poll of political opinions, interviewing both members of 50 married couples. Are the groups in this study independent or matched?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You are testing a new drug to treat insomnia. You randomly assign 80 volunteer subjects to either the experimental (new drug) or control (standard treatment) conditions. Are the groups in this study independent or matched?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You are investigating the effectiveness of a new math textbook for high school students. You administer a pretest to a group of students at the beginning of the semester, and a posttest at the end of a year’s instruction using this textbook, and compare the results. Are the groups in this study independent or matched?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next two exercises.* You are conducting a study of the difference in time at two colleges for undergraduate degree completion. At College A, students take an average of 4.8 years to complete an undergraduate degree, while at College B, they take an average of 4.2 years. The pooled standard deviation for this data is 1.6 years

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Calculate Cohen’s *d* and interpret it.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose the mean time to earn an undergraduate degree at College A was 5.2 years. Calculate the effect size and interpret it.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct an independent-samples t-test with sample size ten in each of two groups. If you are conducting a two-tailed hypothesis test with α = 0.01, what p-values will cause you to reject the null hypothesis?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct an independent samples *t*-test with sample size 15 in each group, with the following hypotheses: * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

*H<sub>0</sub>*: *μ* ≥ 110 * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

*H<sub>a</sub>*: *μ* &lt; 110 * * *
{: data-type="newline"}

If *α* = 0.05, what *t*-values will cause you to reject the null hypothesis?

</div>
</div>

# 10.2: Comparing Two Independent Population Means with Known Population Standard Deviations

*Use the following information to answer the next six exercises.* College students in the sciences often complain that they must spend more on textbooks each semester than students in the humanities. To test this, you draw random samples of 50 science and 50 humanities students from your college, and record how much each spent last semester on textbooks. Consider the science students to be group one, and the humanities students to be group two.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the random variable for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the null and alternative hypotheses for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If the 50 science students spent an average of $530 with a sample standard deviation of $20 and the 50 humanities students spent an average of $380 with a sample standard deviation of $15, would you not reject or reject the null hypothesis? Use an alpha level of 0.05. What is your conclusion?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What would be your decision, if you were using *α* = 0.01?

</div>
</div>

# 10.3: Comparing Two Independent Population Proportions

*Use the information to answer the next six exercises.* You want to know if proportion of homes with cable television service differs between Community A and Community B. To test this, you draw a random sample of 100 for each and record whether they have cable service.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the null and alternative hypotheses for this study

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If 65 households in Community A have cable service, and 78 households in community B, what is the pooled proportion?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
At *α* = 0.03, will you reject the null hypothesis? What is your conclusion? 65 households in Community A have cable service, and 78 households in community B. 100 households in each community were surveyed.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Using an alpha value of 0.01, would you reject the null hypothesis? What is your conclusion? 65 households in Community A have cable service, and 78 households in community B. 100 households in each community were surveyed.

</div>
</div>

# 10.4: Matched or Paired Samples

*Use the following information to answer the next five exercises.* You are interested in whether a particular exercise program helps people lose weight. You conduct a study in which you weigh the participants at the start of the study, and again at the conclusion, after they have participated in the exercise program for six months. You compare the results using a matched-pairs t-test, in which the data is \{weight at conclusion – weight at start}. You believe that, on average, the participants will have lost weight after six months on the exercise program.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the null and alternative hypotheses for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Calculate the test statistic, assuming that <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <msub> <mover accent="true"> <mi>x</mi> <mo>¯</mo> </mover> <mi>d</mi> </msub> </mrow> </math>

 = –5, *s<sub>d</sub>* = 6, and *n* = 30 (pairs).

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the degrees of freedom for this statistic?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Using *α* = 0.05, what is your decision regarding the effectiveness of this program in causing weight loss? What is the conclusion?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What would it mean if the *t*-statistic had been 4.56, and what would have been your decision in that case?

</div>
</div>

# 11.1: Facts About the Chi-Square Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the mean and standard deviation for a chi-square distribution with 20 degrees of freedom?

</div>
</div>

# 11.2: Goodness-of-Fit Test

*Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* Nationally, about 66 percent of high school graduates enroll in higher education. You perform a chi-square goodness of fit test to see if this same proportion applies to your high school’s most recent graduating class of 200. Your null hypothesis is that the national distribution also applies to your high school.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the expected numbers of students from your high school graduating class enrolled and not enrolled in higher education?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Fill out the rest of this table.

<table summary=".."><caption><span data-type="title" /></caption><thead>
<tr>
<th />
<th>Observed (<em>O</em>)</th>
<th>Expected (<em>E</em>)</th>
<th><em>O</em> – <em>E</em></th>
<th>(<em>O</em> – <em>E</em>)2</th>
<th><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
 <mrow>
  <mfrac>
   <mrow>
    <msup>
     <mrow>
      <mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>O</mi><mo>−</mo><mi>E</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo>
     </mrow>
     <mn>2</mn>
    </msup>
    
   </mrow>
   <mi>z</mi>
  </mfrac>
  
 </mrow>
</math>
</th>
</tr>
</thead><tbody>
<tr>
<td>Enrolled</td>
<td>145</td>
<td />
<td />
<td />
<td />
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Not enrolled</td>
<td>55</td>
<td />
<td />
<td />
<td />
</tr>
</tbody></table>
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the degrees of freedom for this chi-square test?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the chi-square test statistic and the *p*-value. At the 5% significance level, what do you conclude?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For a chi-square distribution with 92 degrees of freedom, the curve \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For a chi-square distribution with five degrees of freedom, the curve is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

</div>
</div>

# 11.3: Test of Independence

*Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* You are considering conducting a chi-square test of independence for the data in this table, which displays data about cell phone ownership for freshman and seniors at a high school. Your null hypothesis is that cell phone ownership is independent of class standing.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Compute the expected values for the cells.

<table summary=".."><caption><span data-type="title" /></caption><thead>
<tr>
<th />
<th>Cell = Yes</th>
<th>Cell = No</th>
</tr>
</thead><tbody>
<tr>
<td>Freshman</td>
<td>100</td>
<td>150</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Senior</td>
<td>200</td>
<td>50</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Compute <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <mfrac> <mrow> <msup> <mrow> <mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>O</mi><mo>−</mo><mi>E</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo> </mrow> <mn>2</mn> </msup> </mrow> <mi>z</mi> </mfrac> </mrow> </math>

 for each cell, where *O* = observed and *E* = expected.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the chi-square statistic and degrees of freedom for this study?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
At the *α* = 0.5 significance level, what is your decision regarding the null hypothesis?

</div>
</div>

# 11.4: Test of Homogeneity

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct a chi-square test of homogeneity for data in a five by two table. What is the degrees of freedom for this test?

</div>
</div>

# 11.5: Comparison Summary of the Chi-Square Tests: Goodness-of-Fit, Independence and Homogeneity

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
A 2013 poll in the State of California surveyed people about taxing sugar-sweetened beverages. The results are presented in the following table, and are classified by ethnic group and response type. Are the poll responses independent of the participants’ ethnic group? Conduct a hypothesis test at the 5% significance level.

<table summary=".."><caption><span data-type="title" /></caption><thead>
<tr>
<th>Ethnic Group \ Response Type</th>
<th>Favor</th>
<th>Oppose</th>
<th>No Opinion</th>
<th>Row  Total</th>
</tr>
</thead><tbody>
<tr>
<td>White / Non-Hispanic</td>
<td>234</td>
<td>433</td>
<td>43</td>
<td>710</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Latino</td>
<td>147</td>
<td>106</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>272</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>African American</td>
<td>24</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>71</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Asian American</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>48</td>
<td>16</td>
<td>118</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><strong>Column Total</strong></td>
<td>459</td>
<td>628</td>
<td>84</td>
<td>1171</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
In a test of homogeneity, what must be true about the expected value of each cell?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Stated in general terms, what are the null and alternative hypotheses for the chi-square test of independence?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Stated in general terms, what are the null and alternative hypotheses for the chi-square test of homogeneity?

</div>
</div>

# 11.6: Test of a Single Variance

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
A lab test claims to have a variance of no more than five. You believe the variance is greater. What are the null and alternative hypothesis to test this?

</div>
</div>

