---
title: "Practice Test 2"
layout: page
---


# 4.1: Probability Distribution Function (PDF) for a Discrete Random Variable

*Use the following information to answer the next five exercises.* You conduct a survey among a random sample of students at a particular university. The data collected includes their major, the number of classes they took the previous semester, and amount of money they spent on books purchased for classes in the previous semester.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If *X* = student’s major, then what is the domain of *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If *Y* = the number of classes taken in the previous semester, what is the domain of *Y*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If *Z* = the amount of money spent on books in the previous semester, what is the domain of *Z*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Why are *X*, *Y*, and *Z* in the previous example random variables?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
After collecting data, you find that for one case, *z* = –7. Is this a possible value for *Z*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the two essential characteristics of a discrete probability distribution?

</div>
</div>

*Use this discrete probability distribution represented in this table to answer the following six questions.* The university library records the number of books checked out by each patron over the course of one day, with the following result: <table summary=".."><caption><span data-type="title" /></caption><thead>
<tr>
<th><em>x</em></th>
<th><em>P</em>(<em>x</em>)</th>
</tr>
</thead><tbody>
<tr>
<td>0</td>
<td>0.20</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1</td>
<td>0.45</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2</td>
<td>0.20</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3</td>
<td>0.10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4</td>
<td>0.05</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Define the random variable *X* for this example.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is *P*(*x* &gt; 2)?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the probability that a patron will check out at least one book?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the probability a patron will take out no more than three books?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If the table listed *P*(*x*) as 0.15, how would you know that there was a mistake?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the average number of books taken out by a patron?

</div>
</div>

# 4.2: Mean or Expected Value and Standard Deviation

*Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* Three jobs are open in a company: one in the accounting department, one in the human resources department, and one in the sales department. The accounting job receives 30 applicants, and the human resources and sales department 60 applicants.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If *X* = the number of applications for a job, use this information to fill in [[link]](#fs-idm40199072).

<table summary=".."><caption><span data-type="title" /></caption><thead>
<tr>
<th><em>x</em></th>
<th><em>P</em>(<em>x</em>)</th>
<th><em>x</em><em>P</em>(<em>x</em>)</th>
</tr>
</thead><tbody>
<tr>
<td />
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td />
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td />
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the mean number of applicants?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the PDF for *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Add a fourth column to the table, for (*x* – *μ*)<sup>2</sup>*P*(*x*).

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the standard deviation of *X*?

</div>
</div>

# 4.3: Binomial Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
In a binomial experiment, if *p* = 0.65, what does *q* equal?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the required characteristics of a binomial experiment?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Joe conducts an experiment to see how many times he has to flip a coin before he gets four heads in a row. Does this qualify as a binomial experiment?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next three exercises.* In a particularly community, 65 percent of households include at least one person who has graduated from college. You randomly sample 100 households in this community. Let *X* = the number of households including at least one college graduate.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Describe the probability distribution of *X*.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the mean of *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the standard deviation of *X*?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* Joe is the star of his school’s baseball team. His batting average is 0.400, meaning that for every ten times he comes to bat (an at-bat), four of those times he gets a hit. You decide to track his batting performance his next 20 at-bats.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Define the random variable *X* in this experiment.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Assuming Joe’s probability of getting a hit is independent and identical across all 20 at-bats, describe the distribution of *X*.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Given this information, what number of hits do you predict Joe will get?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the standard deviation of *X*?

</div>
</div>

# 4.4: Geometric Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the three major characteristics of a geometric experiment?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You decide to conduct a geometric experiment by flipping a coin until it comes up heads. This takes five trials. Represent the outcomes of this trial, using H for heads and *T* for tails.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You are conducting a geometric experiment by drawing cards from a normal 52-card pack, with replacement, until you draw the Queen of Hearts. What is the domain of *X* for this experiment?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You are conducting a geometric experiment by drawing cards from a normal 52-card deck, without replacement, until you draw a red card. What is the domain of *X* for this experiment?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next three exercises.* In a particular university, 27 percent of students are engineering majors. You decide to select students at random until you choose one that is an engineering major. Let *X* = the number of students you select until you find one that is an engineering major.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the probability distribution of *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the mean of *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the standard deviation of *X*?

</div>
</div>

# 4.5: Hypergeometric Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You draw a random sample of ten students to participate in a survey, from a group of 30, consisting of 16 boys and 14 girls. You are interested in the probability that seven of the students chosen will be boys. Does this qualify as a hypergeometric experiment? List the conditions and whether or not they are met.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You draw five cards, without replacement, from a normal 52-card deck of playing cards, and are interested in the probability that two of the cards are spades. What are the group of interest, size of the group of interest, and sample size for this example?

</div>
</div>

# 4.6: Poisson Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the key characteristics of the Poisson distribution?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next three exercises.* The number of drivers to arrive at a toll booth in an hour can be modeled by the Poisson distribution.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If *X* = the number of drivers, and the average numbers of drivers per hour is four, how would you express this distribution?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the domain of *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the mean and standard deviation of *X*?

</div>
</div>

# 5.1: Continuous Probability Functions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You conduct a survey of students to see how many books they purchased the previous semester, the total amount they paid for those books, the number they sold after the semester was over, and the amount of money they received for the books they sold. Which variables in this survey are discrete, and which are continuous?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
With continuous random variables, we never calculate the probability that *X* has a particular value, but always speak in terms of the probability that *X* has a value within a particular range. Why is this?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For a continuous random variable, why are *P*(*x* &lt; *c*) and *P*(*x* ≤ *c*) equivalent statements?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For a continuous probability function, *P*(*x* &lt; 5) = 0.35. What is *P*(*x* &gt; 5), and how do you know?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Describe how you would draw the continuous probability distribution described by the function <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mfrac> <mn>1</mn> <mrow> <mn>10</mn> </mrow> </mfrac> </mrow> </math>

 for <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <mn>0</mn><mo>≤</mo><mi>x</mi><mo>≤</mo><mn>10</mn> </mrow> </math>

. What type of a distribution is this?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For the continuous probability distribution described by the function <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mfrac> <mn>1</mn> <mrow> <mn>10</mn> </mrow> </mfrac> </mrow> </math>

 for <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <mn>0</mn><mo>≤</mo><mi>x</mi><mo>≤</mo><mn>10</mn> </mrow> </math>

, what is the *P*(0 &lt; *x* &lt; 4)?

</div>
</div>

# 5.2: The Uniform Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
For the continuous probability distribution described by the function <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <mi>f</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>x</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>=</mo><mfrac> <mn>1</mn> <mrow> <mn>10</mn> </mrow> </mfrac> </mrow> </math>

 for <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <mn>0</mn><mo>≤</mo><mi>x</mi><mo>≤</mo><mn>10</mn> </mrow> </math>

, what is the *P*(2 &lt; *x* &lt; 5)?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* The number of minutes that a patient waits at a medical clinic to see a doctor is represented by a uniform distribution between zero and 30 minutes, inclusive.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If *X* equals the number of minutes a person waits, what is the distribution of *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Write the probability density function for this distribution.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the mean and standard deviation for waiting time?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the probability that a patient waits less than ten minutes?

</div>
</div>

# 5.3: The Exponential Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The distribution of the variable *X*, representing the average time to failure for an automobile battery, can be written as: *X* ~ *Exp*(*m*). Describe this distribution in words.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If the value of *m* for an exponential distribution is ten, what are the mean and standard deviation for the distribution?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Write the probability density function for a variable distributed as: *X* ~ *Exp*(0.2).

</div>
</div>

# 6.1: The Standard Normal Distribution

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Translate this statement about the distribution of a random variable *X* into words: *X* ~ (100, 15).

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If the variable *X* has the standard normal distribution, express this symbolically.

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information for the next six exercises.* According to the World Health Organization, distribution of height in centimeters for girls aged five years and no months has the distribution: *X* ~ *N*(109, 4.5).

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the *z*-score for a height of 112 inches?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the *z*-score for a height of 100 centimeters?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Find the *z*-score for a height of 105 centimeters and explain what that means In the context of the population.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What height corresponds to a *z*-score of 1.5 in this population?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Using the empirical rule, we expect about 68 percent of the values in a normal distribution to lie within one standard deviation above or below the mean. What does this mean, in terms of a specific range of values, for this distribution?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Using the empirical rule, about what percent of heights in this distribution do you expect to be between 95.5 cm and 122.5 cm?

</div>
</div>

# 6.2: Using the Normal Distribution

*Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* The distributor of lotto tickets claims that 20 percent of the tickets are winners. You draw a sample of 500 tickets to test this proposition.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Can you use the normal approximation to the binomial for your calculations? Why or why not.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What are the expected mean and standard deviation for your sample, assuming the distributor’s claim is true?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the probability that your sample will have a mean greater than 100?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If the *z*-score for your sample result is –2.00, explain what this means, using the empirical rule.

</div>
</div>

# 7.1: The Central Limit Theorem for Sample Means (Averages)

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What does the central limit theorem state with regard to the distribution of sample means?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The distribution of results from flipping a fair coin is uniform: heads and tails are equally likely on any flip, and over a large number of trials, you expect about the same number of heads and tails. Yet if you conduct a study by flipping 30 coins and recording the number of heads, and repeat this 100 times, the distribution of the mean number of heads will be approximately normal. How is this possible?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The mean of a normally-distributed population is 50, and the standard deviation is four. If you draw 100 samples of size 40 from this population, describe what you would expect to see in terms of the sampling distribution of the sample mean.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
*X* is a random variable with a mean of 25 and a standard deviation of two. Write the distribution for the sample mean of samples of size 100 drawn from this population.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Your friend is doing an experiment drawing samples of size 50 from a population with a mean of 117 and a standard deviation of 16. This sample size is large enough to allow use of the central limit theorem, so he says the standard deviation of the sampling distribution of sample means will also be 16. Explain why this is wrong, and calculate the correct value.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
You are reading a research article that refers to “the standard error of the mean.” What does this mean, and how is it calculated?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next six exercises.* You repeatedly draw samples of *n* = 100 from a population with a mean of 75 and a standard deviation of 4.5.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the expected distribution of the sample means?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
One of your friends tries to convince you that the standard error of the mean should be 4.5. Explain what error your friend made.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the *z*-score for a sample mean of 76?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What is the *z*-score for a sample mean of 74.7?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What sample mean corresponds to a *z*-score of 1.5?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you decrease the sample size to 50, will the standard error of the mean be smaller or larger? What would be its value?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next two questions.* We use the empirical rule to analyze data for samples of size 60 drawn from a population with a mean of 70 and a standard deviation of 9.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What range of values would you expect to include 68 percent of the sample means?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you increased the sample size to 100, what range would you expect to contain 68 percent of the sample means, applying the empirical rule?

</div>
</div>

# 7.2: The Central Limit Theorem for Sums

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
How does the central limit theorem apply to sums of random variables?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Explain how the rules applying the central limit theorem to sample means, and to sums of a random variable, are similar.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you repeatedly draw samples of size 50 from a population with a mean of 80 and a standard deviation of four, and calculate the sum of each sample, what is the expected distribution of these sums?

</div>
</div>

*Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* You draw one sample of size 40 from a population with a mean of 125 and a standard deviation of seven.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Compute the sum. What is the probability that the sum for your sample will be less than 5,000?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you drew samples of this size repeatedly, computing the sum each time, what range of values would you expect to contain 95 percent of the sample sums?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What value is one standard deviation below the mean?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What value corresponds to a *z*-score of 2.2?

</div>
</div>

# 7.3: Using the Central Limit Theorem

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What does the law of large numbers say about the relationship between the sample mean and the population mean?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Applying the law of large numbers, which sample mean would expect to be closer to the population mean, a sample of size ten or a sample of size 100?

</div>
</div>

*Use this information for the next three questions.* A manufacturer makes screws with a mean diameter of 0.15 cm (centimeters) and a range of 0.10 cm to 0.20 cm; within that range, the distribution is uniform.

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If *X* = the diameter of one screw, what is the distribution of *X*?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose you repeatedly draw samples of size 100 and calculate their mean. Applying the central limit theorem, what is the distribution of these sample means?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Suppose you repeatedly draw samples of 60 and calculate their sum. Applying the central limit theorem, what is the distribution of these sample sums?

</div>
</div>

